Contents lists available at [ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/)

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

journal homepage: [www.elsevier.com/locate/jeem](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jeem)

Image /page/0/Picture/4 description: The image is a book cover with a green background. The title of the book is "JOURNAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS AND MANAGEMENT" in large, bold, white letters. Below the title, in smaller white letters, are the words "CO-EDITORS-IN-CHIEF" followed by "THI REQUATE" and "ROGER VON HAAFEN". In the lower right corner of the cover is a recycling symbol made up of various environmental icons in different colors. In the upper left corner is the publisher's logo. In the upper right corner are the words "ISSN 0095-0696".

# Social Norms and Energy Conservation Beyond the US

Mark A. Andor [a,](#page-0-0)[∗](#page-0-1), Andreas Gerster [b,](#page-0-0) Jörg Peters [a,c,](#page-0-0) Christoph M. Schmidt [a,d](#page-0-0)

<sup>a</sup> *RWI – Leibniz Institute for Economic Research, Germany*

<sup>b</sup> *University of Mannheim, Germany*

<sup>c</sup> *University of Passau, Germany*

<sup>d</sup> *Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany*

### article info

*Article history:* Received 23 July 2019 Revised 21 May 2020 Accepted 4 June 2020 Available online 24 June 2020

*JEL classification:* D12 D83 L94 Q41

*Keywords:* Social norms Energy demand External validity Randomized field experiments Non-price interventions

## abstract

The seminal studies by Allcott and Mullainathan (2010), Allcott (2011), and Allcott and Rogers (2014) show that social comparison-based home energy reports (HER) are a cost-effective climate policy intervention in the US. Our paper demonstrates the context-dependency of this result. In most industrialized countries, average electricity consumption and carbon intensity are well below US levels. Consequently, HER interventions can only become cost-effective if treatment effect sizes are substantially higher. For Germany, we provide evidence from a large-scale randomized controlled trial that effect sizes are in fact considerably lower than in the US. We conclude by illustrating that targeting highly responsive subgroups is crucial to reach cost-effectiveness and by identifying the few countries in which HER are promising policy instruments.

© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

#### **1. Introduction**

[A large literature has shown that social norms can affect individual choices in a variety of domains such as water use \(Brent](#page-13-0) et al., 2015; [Ferraro et al., 2011;](#page-14-0) [Ferraro and Price, 2013;](#page-14-1) [Jaime and Carlsson, 2018\)](#page-14-2) and charitable giving [\(Frey and Meier, 2004;](#page-14-3) [Shang and Croson, 2009\)](#page-14-4). A prominent example are the social comparison-based home energy reports (HER) that the company *Opower* mailed to millions of US households in order to reduce their electricity consumption. Evaluations of *Opower's* HER have documented considerable reductions in electricity consumption of 1.4–3.3% that are also persistent over time [\(Allcott, 2011;](#page-13-1) [Allcott and Rogers, 2014\)](#page-13-2).[1](#page-0-2) Given their low intervention costs, HER are said to be a cost-effective policy instrument to combat climate change [\(Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1) and often serve as a prime example for behavioral interventions that can be scaled to "millions of

<span id="page-0-0"></span>Image /page/0/Picture/23 description: The image shows the Elsevier logo. The logo consists of an illustration above the word "ELSEVIER". The illustration depicts a tree with a banner that reads "NON SOLUS" wrapped around it. Two figures are standing next to the tree.

<span id="page-0-1"></span><sup>∗</sup> Corresponding author. RWI – Leibniz Institute for Economic Research, Hohenzollernstr. 1-3, D-45128, Essen, Germany. *E-mail addresses:* [andor@rwi-essen.de](mailto:andor@rwi-essen.de) (M.A. Andor), [mark.andor@rwi-essen.de](mailto:mark.andor@rwi-essen.de) (M.A. Andor).

<span id="page-0-2"></span><sup>1</sup> We acknowledge that there is no clear-cut definition of a social norm. According to [Nyborg \(2018\),](#page-14-5) environmental economists draw on diverse scholarly traditions, often not having the same phenomenon in mind when using the concept. In the present paper, we follow [Levitt and List \(2007\)](#page-14-6) and assume that consumers receive "moral utility" from energy conservation, which depends on beliefs about the social norm [\(Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1).

consumers" [\(Allcott and Mullainathan, 2010\)](#page-13-3).[2](#page-1-0)

In this paper, we assess the cost-effectiveness of HER interventions in industrialized countries other than the US. While our paper does not question the internal validity of the [Allcott \(2011\)](#page-13-1) and [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\)](#page-13-2) findings, we complement their work by testing the external validity and transferability to other contexts. As [Allcott \(2015,](#page-13-4) p. 1162) concludes, "replication is crucial for program evaluation because it gives a sense of the distribution of effects in different contexts". Hence, we thereby also contribute to the growing literature on the context-dependency of causal effects measured in a particular policy population [and on the scalability of experimental findings \(e.g.](#page-13-8) [Al-Ubaydli et al., 2017a,](#page-13-5) [b;](#page-13-6) [Christensen and Miguel, 2018;](#page-13-7) Dehejia et al., 2019; [DellaVigna and Linos, 2020;](#page-13-9) [Gechter, 2015;](#page-14-7) [Peters et al., 2018;](#page-14-8) [Vivalt, 2015\)](#page-14-9).

In Section [2,](#page-1-1) we demonstrate that US electricity consumption and carbon intensity levels exceed those in virtually all other OECD countries, and that HER are cost-effective in the US precisely because of these relatively high levels. Consequently, the effect sizes of HER treatments would have to be substantially larger in other countries in order to make it a cost-effective climate policy intervention. We show that, at effect sizes observed in the *Opower* studies, HER can only be cost-effective in the US and Australia. To be cost-effective in the rest of the world, HER must generate much larger effect sizes.

In a next step, we test for the effectiveness of HER in Germany, a country with electricity consumption levels that, compared to the US, match the OECD average more closely (Section [3\)](#page-3-0). Based on data from a randomized controlled trial (RCT) among 11,630 households, we find that HER reduce electricity consumption by 0.7%, less than half of the average reductions observed in the *Opower* studies. One reason for the smaller effects in our sample is probably that the social comparisons cannot be updated in Germany on a quarterly basis because customers are metered annually. This is what the different effect sizes for different updating frequencies indicate that [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\)](#page-13-2) observe in the US. Yet, consistent with prior studies in the water and energy contexts [\(Allcott, 2011;](#page-13-1) [Ferraro and Price, 2013;](#page-14-1) [Ferraro and Miranda, 2013\)](#page-14-10), we probe into the heterogeneity of effects and our findings suggest that the smaller effects are mostly due to the generally lower consumption levels in Germany. Hence, for the majority of industrialized countries exhibiting similarly low consumption levels, effect sizes can be expected to be much lower than in the US. HER are not cost-effective in such contexts.

In Section [4,](#page-4-0) we build on our heterogeneity analysis across baseline consumption levels to explore the potential of targeting particularly responsive subgroups, such as high-consumption households. To this end, we calculate the effect sizes required to make HER cost-effective and compare them to effect sizes observed in high-consumption strata.We find that for many countries, such as the United Kingdom, South Korea, Canada, Germany, and Poland, targeting HER can be a promising policy instrument, but only if targeted consumer groups exhibit effect sizes between 5% and 7%. In Germany, we estimate an effect of 3.1% in the highest decile, suggesting that even the top decile is not as responsive as required.

In Section [5,](#page-5-0) we explore the sensitivity of our results to treatment effect persistence and a broader welfare perspective. HER might not only decrease consumption in the year of the treatment but also beyond. Effect persistence considerably amplifies the benefits of HER, which is likely to make them cost-effective in the US, Australia, and Japan, but not in European countries. A further robustness check examines the broader welfare effects following [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\).](#page-13-10) This approach suggests taking into account market imperfections beyond externalities from carbon emissions. No clear picture emerges from this extended welfare analysis. We show that assumptions to gauge electricity market distortions critically determine whether the welfare perspective improves or worsens the assessment of HER. In the concluding section, we identify countries in which targeted HER are particularly promising and discuss the implication of ongoing digitalization in the customer interface of utilities for our findings.

#### <span id="page-1-1"></span>**2. Context-dependency of HER interventions**

By means of a descriptive analysis, this section shows that the cost-effectiveness of HER as a climate policy intervention crucially depends on two factors: the baseline consumption levels and the carbon intensity of electricity generation. Higher average electricity consumption levels translate a given effect size (in terms of percentage reduction of electricity consumption) into higher absolute electricity savings in terms of kilowatt-hours (kWh). In addition, households with higher consumption levels tend to exhibit lower behavioral and technical efficiencies and can thus realize higher effect sizes. Besides baseline consumption, the carbon intensity of electricity generation determines the extent to which electricity savings translate into mitigation of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. For example, power sectors with large shares of lignite- and hard coal-fired power plants are much more carbon-intensive than those relying on hydropower and nuclear energy. As a result, even similar absolute electricity

<span id="page-1-0"></span><sup>2</sup> These findings had a remarkable impact on the academic literature. As of May 2020, [Allcott and Mullainathan \(2010\)](#page-13-3) and [Allcott \(2011\)](#page-13-1) have 781 and 2079 Google Scholar citations, respectively. Further studies that analyze HER in the US are [Allcott \(2015\),](#page-13-4) [Ayres et al. \(2013\),](#page-13-11) [Brandon et al. \(2017\),](#page-13-12) Costa and Kahn (2013) and [Myers and Souza \(2020\), for example. Outside the US, evaluations of social comparison-based HER have been conducted in Australia \(Byrne et al.,](#page-13-13) [2018, electricity sector\), Colombia \(Jaime and Carlsson, 2018, water sector\), Ecuador \(Pellerano et al., 2017, electricity sector\), India \(Sudarshan, 2017, electricity](#page-13-14) sector), and Poland [\(Czajkowski et al., 2019,](#page-13-15) recycling). For a comprehensive overview of the literature on the effects of social comparisons to encourage resource conservation see, for example, [Abrahamse and Steg \(2013\),](#page-13-16) [Andor and Fels \(2018\)](#page-13-17) and [Buckley \(2020\).](#page-13-18)

#### **Table 1**

International cost-effectiveness comparison of HER interventions.

<span id="page-2-3"></span>

| Country        | (1)<br>Average Electricity<br>Consumption in kWh | (2)<br>CO2 Emissions<br>in g/kWh | (3)<br>Cost in<br>Cents/kWh Saved | (4)<br>Abatement<br>Cost in \$/t CO2 | (5)<br>CO2 Abatement Cost<br>Relative to US |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Canada         | 11,379                                           | 158                              | 1.1–2.6                           | 67–162                               | 3.3                                         |
| United States  | 12,293                                           | 489                              | 1.0–2.4                           | 20–49                                | 1.0                                         |
| France         | 5859                                             | 64                               | 2.1–5.0                           | 323–779                              | 16.0                                        |
| Germany        | 3304                                             | 486                              | 3.7–8.8                           | 75–182                               | 3.7                                         |
| Italy          | 2542                                             | 343                              | 4.8–11.5                          | 139–335                              | 6.9                                         |
| Poland         | 1935                                             | 769                              | 6.3–15.1                          | 81–196                               | 4.0                                         |
| Spain          | 4040                                             | 247                              | 3.0–7.2                           | 121–293                              | 6.0                                         |
| Sweden         | 8025                                             | 13                               | 1.5–3.6                           | 1162–2799                            | 57.6                                        |
| United Kingdom | 4145                                             | 459                              | 2.9–7.0                           | 64–153                               | 3.2                                         |
| Japan          | 5434                                             | 572                              | 2.2–5.4                           | 39–94                                | 1.9                                         |
| South Korea    | 3489                                             | 536                              | 3.5–8.4                           | 65–156                               | 3.2                                         |
| Australia      | 6959                                             | 798                              | 1.7–4.2                           | 22–53                                | 1.1                                         |

*Notes:* Our calculations assume a printing and mailing cost of 1 US\$ per report, four reports per year and average electricity reductions of 1.37–3.30%. Average electricity consumption and CO2 intensities of electricity generation correspond to the most recently available data (for 2013), as documented in [WEC \(2016\)](#page-15-0) and [IEA \(2015\),](#page-14-14) respectively.

savings can yield widely diverging CO2 abatement effects across countries.[3](#page-2-0)

We consider the ten OECD countries with the largest total residential electricity consumption [\(WEC, 2016\)](#page-15-0). In addition, we include Poland, an OECD country with low average electricity consumption but very carbon-intensive electricity generation, and Sweden, a country with high average consumption but low carbon intensity. We project HER's cost-effectiveness in these countries, assuming treatment effects of 1.4–3.3%, which corresponds to the full range of effect sizes observed in the *Opower* [studies \(](#page-15-0)[Allcott, 2011](#page-13-1)[\). Average electricity consumption levels and carbon intensities are drawn from official data sets \(WEC,](#page-15-0) 2016; [IEA, 2016\)](#page-14-15).[4](#page-2-1) For simplicity, we assume printing and mailing cost of 1 US\$ per letter in all countries (as in [Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1) and neglect any administrative cost. Hence, if these costs double (halve), our abatement costs double (halve) as well.[5](#page-2-2) Because quarterly reports have achieved the highest cost-effectiveness in previous studies [\(Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1), we presume that four reports are sent within one year.

We then compare the HER abatement cost to the avoided social cost of carbon, the usual yardstick to assess the costeffectiveness of climate change mitigation policies [\(Greenstone et al., 2013;](#page-14-16) [Nordhaus, 2014\)](#page-14-17). For simplicity, we denote an intervention as cost-effective if its abatement cost is below the social cost of carbon. [Nordhaus \(2014\)](#page-14-17) estimates the social cost of carbon to be 19 US\$ per ton in 2015, while US [IAWG \(2013\)](#page-14-18) provides an estimate of 38 US\$. For our assessments, we use the larger estimate of 38\$, which is more favorable to the cost-effectiveness of HER. [Table 1](#page-2-3) summarizes the descriptive statistics and our cost-effectiveness indicators. Average electricity consumption levels and carbon intensities are depicted in Columns (1) and (2). By dividing the cost of HER by the electricity savings for the range of effect sizes, we obtain a range of cost per kWh saved, which can be found in Column (3).

Column (4) of [Table 1](#page-2-3) depicts the resulting abatement cost ranges. It shows that HER are considerably less cost-effective in most countries other than the US. In fact, our projections suggest that no country except the US and Australia reaches abatement cost levels that would justify the use of HER as a policy instrument to combat climate change when using social cost of carbon of 38 US\$ per ton as a yardstick. This finding demonstrates that the potential of HER as a cost-effective climate policy instrument hinges strongly upon both average electricity consumption levels and carbon intensities of electricity generation.

Our interim conclusion holds for the treatment effect sizes reported for the US but might change if HER were more effective in other countries. To explore this possibility, Column (5) presents a summary indicator: the CO2 abatement cost per country relative to the cost in the US at a given treatment effect size. In Germany, for example, the abatement cost of HER exceeds those in the US by a factor of 3.7. In other words, to reach the same abatement cost level as in the *Opower* study, the effect size of HER in Germany would have to be at 6.3% (3.7 × 1.7%, assuming the estimated average effect size of 1.7% reported in [Allcott \(2011\)\)](#page-13-1).

<span id="page-2-0"></span><sup>3</sup> There is a literature that discusses whether cap-and-trade schemes, such as the European Union Emissions Trading System, and energy saving policies, such as HER, are complements (e.g. [Dietz et al., 2009\)](#page-13-19) or substitutes (e.g. [Goulder, 2013\)](#page-14-19). Some even argue that energy saving policies that shift demand away from sectors subject to a cap increase aggregate emissions [\(Perino, 2015\)](#page-14-20). We take the most favorable stance for HER and treat them as complements to cap-and-trade schemes in our cost-effectiveness calculations.

<span id="page-2-1"></span><sup>4</sup> We use average carbon intensities – rather than marginal carbon intensities – to approximate abated carbon emissions for two reasons. First, we lack evidence on the timing of electricity savings from HER. The type of marginal power plant often changes within a day, so that evidence on the timing of savings is a prerequisite for determining marginal carbon emissions. In Germany, for example, coal-fired power plants (822 g CO2 per kWh, [UBA, 2018\)](#page-14-21) are price-setting in the off-peak period, while gas-fired power plants (353 g CO2 per kWh, [UBA, 2018\)](#page-14-21) are price-setting in the peak period. Second, current marginal emissions can also be misleading as, in the long run, electricity savings ultimately induce capacity adjustments in the electricity market. Using the average carbon intensity reflects an agnostic stance on the induced capacity adjustments.

<span id="page-2-2"></span><sup>5</sup> In the course of an ongoing digitalization, HER could also be sent electronically, for instance via emails or internet platforms, thereby completely avoiding printing and postage costs, but also altering the effectiveness of the HER treatment fundamentally. We discuss the potential implications in the concluding section.

Your electricity consumption, compared to households in your neighborhood

The rating of your consumption during the last year:You could do better Good Great

| Your last annual consumption             | 2855 kWh |
|------------------------------------------|----------|
| Average consumption of all neighbors     | 4503 kWh |
| The most efficient 20% of your neighbors | 1581 kWh |

<span id="page-3-1"></span>**Fig. 1.** Social comparison element in HER (Translation of the Original German Version).

For France and Sweden, the abatement costs surpass those in the US by a factor of 16.0 and 57.6, respectively, implying that HER interventions cannot become cost-effective even under optimistic assumptions. These abatement cost ratios exceed 1.9 for all OECD countries considered except Australia, so that effect sizes would have to be (at least) twice as high to reach the same CO2 [abatement cost as in the US. Whether treatment effects like this are possible is an empirical question. For example,](#page-14-1) Ferraro and Price (2013) report effect sizes of almost 5% for water conservation during droughts. Therefore, in the next section, we test the effectiveness of social comparison-based home energy reports in Germany.

#### <span id="page-3-0"></span>**3. Treatment effects of HER in Germany**

#### *3.1. HER design in the German experiment*

In cooperation with the German firm *Grünspar*, a service provider for utilities, we designed the HER for our study in a way that matches the *Opower* intervention closely, but not perfectly. We conducted a "natural field experiment" (Levitt and List, [2009\) to the extent that households were not informed about the experiment. Households in the treatment group received four](#page-14-22) quarterly letters, while households in the control group did not receive any letter beyond the utilities' regular communication. Just as in the *Opower* reports, our HER provided electricity-saving tips and compared the household's consumption with that of its neighbors, as visualized in [Fig. 1.](#page-3-1) The four HER are comprehensively documented in [Appendix C.](#page-13-20) Our HER differs from the *Opower* HER with respect to the following features: First, while meters in the *Opower* population were read on a monthly or quarterly basis and electricity consumption information could thus be updated in each letter, meter reading cycles in Germany are annual and thus do not allow for intra-year updates. Therefore, we repeated the social comparison based on the most recently available annual electricity consumption in the first three reports. We expect that the absence of intra-year updates might lead to a slight decrease of the energy conservation effect. For example, [Gilbert and Zivin \(2014\)](#page-14-23) find that receipt of an electricity bill increases households' attention and reduces electricity consumption.[6](#page-3-2) We see this difference to the *Opower* reports as unavoidable and even necessary. Annual billing cycles are an important element of the German context and adapting HER accordingly is a crucial part of testing the transferability of HER's effectiveness.[7](#page-3-3)

Second, our reports announce an individualized electricity consumption goal for each recipient household (10% less than the previous year) and additionally offer rebates for the purchase of energy-efficient appliances.[8](#page-3-4) As goal setting and rebates generally have positive effects on the uptake of energy-efficient durables and energy conservation (e.g. [Davis et al., 2014;](#page-13-21) Harding and [Hsiaw, 2014\), we expect this modification to slightly intensify the HER's effectiveness. Third, the last of the four HER contains](#page-14-24) testimonials, i.e. stylized examples of electricity-saving actions implemented by hypothetical households ("We have recently bought a new energy-efficient refrigerator that saves us around 60 EUR per year"; pictures of testimonials can be found in [Appendix C\)](#page-13-20). The fact that our HER contain further elements beyond the social comparison is in line with other peer comparison studies that typically comprise further contextual information (for a review, see [Andor and Fels, 2018\)](#page-13-17).

<span id="page-3-2"></span><sup>6</sup> Yet, intra-year updates could also reduce the conservation effect, as [Wichman \(2017\)](#page-15-1) finds that customers increase water consumption in response to more frequent billing. The interaction effect of billing and social comparisons might be an interesting topic for future research.

<span id="page-3-3"></span><sup>7</sup> One might argue that our treatment is more akin to a single treatment rather than a repeated treatment because the quarterly letters cannot report new information (as the meters are read annually) and the experiment lasts only one year. Yet, even single treatment HER interventions have induced effect sizes of around 5% in the previous literature [\(Ferraro and Price, 2013\)](#page-14-1). Consequently, a large treatment effect from the kind of treatment used in this study seems possible.

<span id="page-3-4"></span><sup>8</sup> [Table A1](#page-9-0) in the appendix provides a detailed comparison between our HER and the one sent out by *Opower*.

Balance of baseline characteristics between treatment and control group.

<span id="page-4-2"></span>

|                                         | Treatment Group | Control Group | Difference<br>(Std. Error; p-Value) |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|---------------|-------------------------------------|
| Baseline Consumption (2014), in kWh     | 2281.3          | 2279.3        | 2.0<br>(29.62; 0.95)                |
| Baseline Billing Period Length, in Days | 362.7           | 362.6         | 0.1<br>(0.12; 0.47)                 |
| Number of Households                    | 5808            | 5812          |                                     |

#### *3.2. Experimental design and data*

For the implementation of the study, we cooperated with a medium-sized electricity provider located in Kassel, Germany, with around 135,000 residential customers. In total, the trial was implemented in a study sample of 11,630 residential electricity consumers. We randomized the HER intervention among those households that received their annual bill between November 2014 and April 2015.[9](#page-4-1) Households in the treatment group received the four HER within one year, while households in the control group did not receive any report or communication other than the business-as-usual correspondence from the electricity provider. We sent the first HER shortly after the households' annual meter reading, which serves as the baseline of our analysis.

Endline data is retrieved from the annual business-as-usual metering one year later, which took place in the period between November 2015 and April 2016. Our sample includes only those households that had been with the electricity provider for at least one year so that we can make use of baseline consumption data. In addition, as in the *Opower* programs, households with more than one meter were excluded from the sample. The randomization was stratified by households' baseline electricity consumption and billing month.

[Table 2](#page-4-2) illustrates that baseline electricity consumption and billing period length are well balanced across the treatment and control groups and we cannot detect any statistically significant differences. Furthermore, the table shows that households in our sample consume on average 2300 kWh per year, which is far less than the 12,000 kWh consumed by the average US household but also less than the German average of around 3300 kWh per year (depicted in [Table 1\)](#page-2-3). The reason for the latter is that our study's target area, Kassel and its surrounding suburbs, is an urban area where households are typically smaller than the average German household. We examine the representativeness of our study region compared to the rest of Germany by using sociodemographic variables at the regional zip code level, provided by the geomarketing firm *microm Consumer Marketing*. Beyond the lower electricity consumption, we find that our sample provides a fair representation in terms of key socio-demographic variables, such as percentage of retirees, unemployment rate, purchasing power, and non-German citizenship (see [Table A2](#page-9-1) in the appendix).

#### <span id="page-4-0"></span>**4. Results**

#### *4.1. Average treatment effect*

To determine the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of the HER on electricity consumption, we estimate the following differences-in-differences regression model:

$$
\Delta Y_i = \alpha + \delta T_i + \epsilon_i \tag{1}
$$

where Δ*Yi* = (*Y*<sup>2015</sup> *<sup>i</sup>* <sup>−</sup> *<sup>Y</sup>*<sup>2014</sup> *<sup>i</sup>* )∕*Y*<sup>2015</sup> *<sup>i</sup>,<sup>c</sup>* corresponds to the change in the annual electricity consumption of household *<sup>i</sup>* before (*Y*<sup>2014</sup> *<sup>i</sup>* ) and after the HER treatment (*Y*<sup>2015</sup> *<sup>i</sup>* ), *Ti* is the treatment dummy variable that equals unity for households that received the HER, and *<sup>i</sup>* designates an idiosyncratic error term. To account for different billing period lengths, we normalize all yearly electricity consumption to 365 days. Furthermore, we divide the difference between annual consumption by the average postperiod control group consumption, *Y*<sup>2015</sup> *<sup>i</sup>,<sup>c</sup>* , so that the ATE identified by expresses average electricity savings as a percentage of the average consumption level. We use this normalization throughout our analysis because it facilitates cost-effectiveness calculations. In particular, it allows us to easily determine the total electricity savings in a population by multiplying the average electricity consumption level by the ATE.

[Table 3](#page-5-1) presents the results and shows that the average HER treatment effect is a 0.7% reduction that is statistically significant at the 10 percent level (Column 1). In Columns (2)–(3) we trim our sample by excluding outliers and include weekly time dummies for both the baseline and the treatment period as further control variables.[10](#page-4-3) This change does not markedly alter the

<span id="page-4-1"></span><sup>9</sup> We have stratified randomization based on the following baseline electricity consumption bins: 0–1000; 1000–2000; 2000–3000; 4000–5000; 5000–6000; 6000–10,000; 10,000–20,000 kWh. [Appendix A3](#page-9-2) shows that our results remain unchanged when we control for stratification bins.

<span id="page-4-3"></span><sup>10</sup> We remove outlier observations when the change in the electricity use from 2014 to 2015 falls below the 1% percentile (−68.1%) or exceeds the 99% percentile (+52.7%). Such large changes in consumption can arise from temporarily uninhabited dwellings, for example, and it is very unlikely that they are a consequence of receiving HER. To control for time effects, we include weekly dummies that equal 1 if a week falls into the billing period. Weekly dummies are included for both billing periods.

#### **Table 3**

Average treatment effect (ATE) on households' electricity consumption.

<span id="page-5-1"></span>

|                    | (1)            | (2)             | (3)             |
|--------------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| ATE                | -0.719*        | -0.620**        | -0.684**        |
| Standard Error     | (0.383)        | (0.270)         | (0.269)         |
| 95% Conf. Interval | [-1.469,0.032] | [-1.150,-0.090] | [-1.212,-0.156] |
| Outliers Removed   | –              | ✓               | ✓               |
| Time Controls      | –              | –               | ✓               |
| R2                 | 0.0003         | 0.0005          | 0.025           |
| Number of Obs.     | 11620          | 11388           | 11388           |

*Notes:* The outcome variable is the change in a household's annual electricity consumption between the treatment and baseline period, divided by the average control group consumption in the post period (both in kilowatt-hours), and multiplied by 100 to ease the readability as the percentage changes. ∗∗, <sup>∗</sup> denote statistical significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.

#### **Table 4**

<span id="page-5-2"></span>Average treatment effects (ATE) in subsamples based on households' baseline consumption in 2014.

|                    | (1)<br>Full Sample | (2)<br>Above Median<br>$Y_i^{2014} > p_{50}(Y_i^{2014})$ | (3)<br>Above Top Quartile<br>$Y_i^{2014} > p_{75}(Y_i^{2014})$ | (4)<br>Above Top Decile<br>$Y_i^{2014} > p_{90}(Y_i^{2014})$ |
|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| ATE                | -0.684**           | -0.910**                                                 | -1.544**                                                       | -3.058**                                                     |
| Standard Error     | (0.269)            | (0.454)                                                  | (0.725)                                                        | (1.347)                                                      |
| 95% Conf. Interval | [-1.212,-0.156]    | [-1.801,-0.020]                                          | [-2.965,-0.123]                                                | [-5.702,-0.415]                                              |
| Outliers Removed   | ✓                  | ✓                                                        | ✓                                                              | ✓                                                            |
| Time Controls      | ✓                  | ✓                                                        | ✓                                                              | ✓                                                            |
| R2                 | 0.025              | 0.037                                                    | 0.067                                                          | 0.133                                                        |
| Number of Obs.     | 11,388             | 5695                                                     | 2847                                                           | 1139                                                         |

*Notes:* The outcome variable is the change in a household's annual electricity consumption between the treatment and baseline periods, divided by the average control group consumption in the Post period (both in kilowatt-hours), and multiplied by 100 to ease the readability as the percentage changes. ∗∗ denote statistical significance at the 5% level. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. The median of baseline consumption, *p*50(*Y*<sup>2014</sup> *<sup>i</sup>* ), is 1883 kWh, the top quartile is 2794 kWh and the top decile is 3921 kWh.

effect size but increases precision considerably.

Moreover, throughout the specifications of [Table 3,](#page-5-1) the confidence intervals imply that we can reject the null hypothesis of an average reduction in electricity consumption beyond 1.5% with 95% confidence – and hence nearly the entire range of effect sizes that have been estimated by [Allcott \(2011\)](#page-13-1) for the US. Because of the large differences in average consumption levels between German and US households, absolute electricity savings from HER diverge even more strongly. Our ATE of around 0.7% translates into an absolute average electricity reduction of around 16 kWh per year or 0.04 kWh per day, which is equivalent to turning off a 30 Watt light bulb for some 90 min every day. For comparison, [Allcott \(2011\)](#page-13-1) estimates an electricity conservation effect of 1.7% for quarterly reports, which translates into absolute savings of 191 kWh per year (0.52 kWh per day) in the US.

Updating our cost-effectiveness analysis from Section [2](#page-1-1) shows that our treatment effect estimates imply intervention costs per saved kWh of around 0.25 US\$ (4 US\$/16 kWh), compared to only around 0.01–0.05 US\$ in the US *Opower* samples (Allcott, [2011\). Dividing the cost estimates by the carbon intensity – which is virtually on par for the US and Germany – yields the cost](#page-13-1) per mitigated ton of CO2 of 505 US\$ in Germany, compared to 25–105 US\$ in the US *Opower* samples. This finding reinforces our assessment that HER are not a cost-effective climate policy instrument in Germany.

#### *4.2. Treatment effect heterogeneity*

The considerably higher absolute consumption levels in the US might also partly explain the higher treatment effects in relative terms. As [Fig. A1](#page-9-2) in [Appendix A](#page-9-2) illustrates, US households consume at least twice the electricity of German households in every domain except for cooking. In particular, space cooling accounts for more than 2000 kWh in the US but is virtually absent in Germany. Such differences can have important implications for saving potentials. For example, [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\)](#page-13-2) find that HER are particularly effective in winter and summer when US households respond by reducing electricity consumption for heating and cooling, respectively.

<span id="page-5-0"></span>To test empirically whether households with high consumption levels have larger saving potentials, we estimate the ATE in subsamples of households that use more than the median, the top quartile, and the top decile of baseline electricity consumption, respectively. Indeed, as [Table 4](#page-5-2) illustrates, households with larger baseline consumption realize higher average savings, again expressed as a percentage of the average consumption in the population. For households above the median, we observe a statistically significant reduction of 0.9%. The treatment effect even reaches 1.6% and 3.1% in the top quartile and top decile, respectively, and remains statistically significant in spite of the decreasing sample size.

Image /page/6/Figure/1 description: This bar chart shows the critical ATE in percent for different countries. The x-axis shows the countries, and the y-axis shows the critical ATE in percent. The bar chart shows that Sweden has the highest critical ATE in percent, followed by France and Italy. The United States has the lowest critical ATE in percent. The critical ATE in percent for each country is as follows: United States: 1.8, Australia: 1.9, Japan: 3.4, United Kingdom: 5.5, South Korea: 5.6, Canada: 5.9, Germany: 6.6, Poland: 7.1, Spain: 10.5, Italy: 12.1, France: 28.1, Sweden: 100.9.

<span id="page-6-0"></span>**Fig. 2.** Critical ATE, by Country.

#### **5. Targeting**

The heterogeneity analysis has shown that effect sizes increase considerably with baseline electricity consumption. Top decile households are much more responsive, with an effect size of more than 3%. Likewise, [Allcott \(2011\)](#page-13-1) estimates an effect size of 6% in the top decile of the *Opower* sample in the US, which is substantially higher than the overall ATE. This treatment heterogeneity suggests that there is considerable scope for targeting particularly responsive subgroups, such as households with high baseline electricity consumption.

In order to explore the cost-effectiveness of targeted interventions for a set of OECD countries, [Fig. 2](#page-6-0) shows the minimum effect size required to bring down abatement costs of HER below the 38 US\$ social cost of carbon yardstick ("critical ATE" in the following). A cost-effective targeting strategy in the respective country would have to identify consumer groups with a responsiveness at least as high as this critical ATE. In Germany, for example, HER would only be cost-effective in groups that exhibit an effect size of at least 6.6%. In our RCT, even the highest decile of electricity consumers reduced their consumption by about 3% (see [Table 4\)](#page-5-2). Taking into account that baseline electricity consumption in our sample is below the German average, effect sizes in the top decile might be larger in other parts of the country but would need to double to make targeted HER cost-effective. The UK, South Korea, Canada, and Poland have critical ATEs akin to Germany. Hence, targeting in these countries would have to identify highly responsive consumers that realize about the 6% effect size that has been documented for top decile consumers in the US [\(Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1). The critical ATEs in Spain, Italy, and especially France and Sweden reach orders of magnitude where even a well-targeted HER intervention cannot become cost-effective.

#### **6. Effect persistence and welfare**

Our cost-effectiveness projections so far have relied on a set of assumptions, most of which favor the cost-effectiveness of HER. For example, we have ignored administrative cost and considered the maximum effect size found in the literature as well as a high estimate of the social cost of carbon (38 US\$ per ton). In this section, we examine two further aspects that might alter the HER cost-effectiveness balance: persistence in electricity savings beyond the treatment year and the consideration of a broader set of benefits and costs for welfare analysis.

Hitherto, we have assumed that HER effects only induce electricity savings in the year of the treatment. For the US, though, there is evidence that effects persist over time [\(Allcott and Rogers, 2014;](#page-13-2) [Brandon et al., 2017\)](#page-13-12). To calculate the HER abatement costs under an optimistic persistence scenario, we assume that effect sizes attenuate linearly by 15 percentage points per annum [\(Allcott and Rogers, 2014\)](#page-13-2). We consider our cost-effectiveness analysis with persistent conservation effects optimistic, simply because we took the lower bound of [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\)](#page-13-2) estimates, but also because the estimated waning of the treatment effect in other studies of HER and similar interventions are much larger [\(Brandon et al., 2017;](#page-13-12) [Ferraro et al., 2011;](#page-14-0) Bernedo et al., [2014\). Furthermore, we set discount rates to zero. Electricity savings then increase by a factor of 3.85, implying that abatement](#page-13-22) costs and thus the critical ATEs decrease accordingly. Referring to the interval of empirical effect sizes (0.7% in Germany up to a maximum of 3.3% in the US), [Fig. 3](#page-7-0) indicates that HER reach potentially cost-effective levels in all countries but Sweden and France. Especially for the US, Australia, and Japan, the critical ATEs appear to be very promising under this persistence scenario. For the remaining countries, critical ATEs must still reach levels that are substantially higher than the 0.7% observed in our German sample. Given the rather low baseline consumption levels in those countries, substantially higher effect sizes are unlikely in population-wide interventions. Yet, persistence further strengthens the scope for HER targeted at more responsive subgroups as outlined in the previous section.

Image /page/7/Figure/1 description: This bar chart shows the critical ATE in percent for different countries. The x-axis shows the countries, and the y-axis shows the critical ATE in percent. The bar chart shows that Sweden has the highest critical ATE in percent, followed by France, Italy, Spain, Poland, Germany, Canada, South Korea, United Kingdom, Japan, Australia, and United States. The critical ATE in percent for each country is as follows: United States: 0.5, Australia: 0.5, Japan: 0.9, United Kingdom: 1.4, South Korea: 1.5, Canada: 1.5, Germany: 1.7, Poland: 1.8, Spain: 2.7, Italy: 3.1, France: 7.3, Sweden: 26.2.

<span id="page-7-0"></span>

**Fig. 3.** Critical ATE in the year of the treatment under persistence (15 percentage points Annual Reduction of Effect Size), by country.

Following [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\),](#page-13-10) we now conduct a broader welfare analysis that incorporates more factors than merely the benefits from CO2 abatement and postage and printing cost. HER can trigger additional welfare effects beyond the reduction of carbon externalities due to demand- and supply-side imperfections, such as a dead-weight loss induced by mark-ups on production costs. On the demand side, consumers benefit, for example, from electricity savings in the form of reduced energy costs but bear adjustment costs such as investments for more efficient appliances and loss of utility from forgone energy consumption.

This broader welfare analysis is complex and presented in more detail in [Appendix B.](#page-12-0) To gauge unobserved demand side costs and benefits, we refer to [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\),](#page-13-10) who estimate the net welfare effect of HER on consumers by eliciting the recipients' willingness-to-pay (WTP) for continued delivery of HER. They find that recipients' average WTP amounts to 54% of the electricity cost savings from receiving HER. While the remaining 46% reflects the consumers' costs from receiving HER, the WTP of 54% of the electricity cost savings implies that HER induce welfare gains by reducing electricity consumption. Such welfare gains arise as HER reduce so-called "internalities", i.e. consumers' misoptimization in the use of energy, by for example increasing attention to electricity use (see, for instance, [Allcott and Kessler, 2019;](#page-13-10) [Allcott, 2016\)](#page-13-23).

For the supply side, we retrieve country-specific electricity prices as well as production costs and use their difference to approximate the dead-weight loss. Because production costs in the electricity sector hinge critically on the considered time horizon, we approximate them by two measures: the average spot price, which measures short-term production cost, and the levelized cost, i.e. per kWh cost of building and operating a power plant over its lifetime. [Table A6](#page-12-1) in the appendix presents our welfare calculations for both types of production costs. When we use levelized cost to approximate production cost, we find that welfare increases in the US, Canada, France, Poland, Sweden, and South Korea, relative to the results in Section [2.](#page-1-1) In contrast, when we approximate production cost by spot prices, the welfare assessment becomes more favorable only for South Korea.

#### **7. Conclusion**

This paper has examined whether the core result from the *Opower* experiments in the US – the cost-effectiveness of social comparison-based home energy reports (HER) as a climate policy instrument – generalizes to other contexts. In a descriptive analysis, we show that lower electricity consumption levels and carbon intensities of electricity generation reduce the costeffectiveness potentials of HER considerably in all industrialized countries, except for Australia. In particular for European countries, we demonstrate that treatment effects have to be much larger than those observed in the US to make HER cost-effective.

Moreover, by means of a large-scale randomized controlled trial in Germany, we provide evidence that HER effect sizes are decidedly lower than in the US. Our estimates imply an average reduction in electricity consumption of 0.7%, half of what was observed at the lower bound of the 1.4–3.3 percent effect size spectrum in the US. One notable difference between *Opower* and our setup is the annual metering in Germany, which renders quarterly updating of social comparisons impossible. Such structural features are important determinants for the potential of social comparison-based reports in different countries and, hence, part and parcel of the generalizability of findings in a specific setting. In addition, by means of our heterogeneity analysis we show that effect sizes in higher consumption households are quite similar to the *Opower* findings, suggesting that the major reason for the considerably lower conservation effect is the lower baseline electricity consumption in Germany. This in turn indicates that effect sizes will also be much lower in other industrialized countries with similarly low consumption levels.

We furthermore analyze two aspects that could improve the appeal of HER. First, we show that targeting HER, for instance to high-consumption households, can be a promising policy instrument to reach cost-effectiveness for many countries, such as the United Kingdom, South Korea, Canada, and Poland, but only if highly responsive target groups are identified. For Germany, our empirical estimates imply that even the highest decile is not responsive enough to render HER cost-effective. Second, we illustrate the influence of effect persistence beyond the year of the treatment and show that, when there are persistent conservation effects, HER can become cost-effective in all industrialized countries except for France and Sweden, where almost carbon-free power mixes prevent HERs' cost-effectiveness. Yet, in all countries except the US, Australia and Japan, effect sizes would have to exceed 1.4%, which is substantially more than the average treatment effect of 0.7% that we estimate in our German sample. These more optimistic conclusions have to be interpreted with some care, given that in all analyses throughout the paper we used the higher social cost of carbon estimate as a yardstick (38 US\$ per ton). Moving more towards the lower estimate (19 US\$ per ton) renders HER ineffective again, even under generous persistence and targeting assumptions.

From a policy perspective, our results show that HER are not a silver bullet for climate policy in most European countries. Beyond the US, we only identify Australia and Japan as promising countries for a large-scale rollout of HER. Though, even in Australia, the US and Japan, it is questionable if HER are cost-effective for all utilities. For example, [Allcott \(2015\)](#page-13-4) finds that treatment effects tend to be smaller for utilities that implement HER later, and [Byrne et al. \(2018\)](#page-13-14) estimate a null effect for HER in Australia. Yet, we also demonstrate that even in Europe, targeting and effect persistence can render HER cost-effective, making this an important field for future research. Furthermore, more evidence on the marginal abated emissions through HER is important, as emissions vary considerably by location and time of day (cf. [Zivin et al., 2014\)](#page-15-2), which can have strong impacts on the evaluation of environmental policies (cf. [Holland et al., 2016,](#page-14-25) [2019\)](#page-14-26). In addition, future evaluations should go beyond cost-benefit analyses and provide a comprehensive welfare assessment in the vein of [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\),](#page-13-10) embracing all benefits and costs of an intervention. Not least, the context variables we have identified – electricity consumption levels and carbon intensities – are also relevant for the assessment of other climate policy instruments targeting residential electricity demand. Other behavioral instruments as well as taxes and subsidies are arguably less cost-effective in European countries, while climate policy instruments that are cost-effective outside the US will likely be cost-effective in the US.

On a more general note, our paper contributes to the emerging literature on the transferability of causal effects across set[tings and on the scalability of experimental findings \(](#page-13-25)[Allcott, 2015](#page-13-4)[;](#page-13-25) [Al-Ubaydli et al., 2017a,](#page-13-5) [b;](#page-13-6) [Davis et al., 2017;](#page-13-24) Deaton and Cartwright, 2018; [Gechter, 2015;](#page-14-7) [Hotz et al., 2005;](#page-14-27) [Leviton, 2017;](#page-14-28) [Muller, 2015;](#page-14-29) [Peters et al., 2018;](#page-14-8) [Pritchett et al., 2015;](#page-14-30) Vivalt, [2015\). Even if a proof-of-concept is furnished with high internal validity for one policy population – as was done in different](#page-14-9) evaluations of the *Opower* case for the US – the transferability to other policy populations can prove difficult. We complement the literature by explicitly demonstrating that not only the average treatment effect but also other components of a cost-effectiveness analysis are context-dependent.

Prudence in terms of external validity also applies to the present paper. Digitalization of daily routines through smart metering and digital information gadgets will alter the customer interface of utilities and will extend the spectrum of possibilities for energy savings campaigns. We can only speculate how the pivotal parameters determining the cost-effectiveness of HER policies will change in this new environment: The costs considered in our analysis – postal and shipping costs – are of course eliminated. But administrative costs and psychological costs may continue to play a role, which we, conservatively, assumed to be zero. Concerning the effectiveness of digital HER, first pieces of evidence provide a mixed picture [\(Byrne et al., 2018;](#page-13-14) [Henry et al., 2019\)](#page-14-31). We would argue that unobtrusive digital HER are likely to be even less effective than letter based HER, while obtrusive digital HER, for example provided by an interactive app, could increase effectiveness, but also the psychological costs. Clearly, more research is needed along these lines. In any case, our main descriptive observation holds: from a climate policy perspective, the scope of HER – digital or not – is very limited given the low electricity consumption levels and power sector CO2-intensities in most industrialized countries.

#### **Acknowledgements**

We gratefully acknowledge financial support by the Stiftung Mercator, without which this project would not have been possible. Furthermore, this work has been partly supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through CRC TR 224 (Project B07) and the Collaborative Research Center *Statistical Modeling of Nonlinear Dynamic Processes* (SFB 823), within Project A3, *Dynamic Technology Modeling*. Peters acknowledges the support of a special grant (Sondertatbestand) from the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy and the Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Research of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia. We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions by Hunt Allcott, Michael Baurmann, Cyndi Berck, Stefano Carattini, Fredrik Carlsson, Paul Ferraro, Manuel Frondel, Kenneth Gillingham, Timo Goeschl, Lorenz Götte, Martin Kesternich, Andreas Lange, Bruno Lanz, Grischa Perino, Michael Price, Stephan Sommer, and Colin Vance as well as participants at 1st RWI Empirical Environmental Economics Workshop, the 32nd Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, the 6th Mannheim Energy Conference, the 23rd Annual Conference of the European Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, the 6th World Congress of Environmental and Resource Economists, and seminars at VU Amsterdam, University of Gothenburg, University of Passau, University of Hamburg, and ZEW. We thank Vera Huwe and Lukas Tomberg for excellent research assistance.

#### <span id="page-9-2"></span><span id="page-9-0"></span>**A. Appendix**

#### **Table A1**

Comparison of HER elements.

|                                                                                                 | Our report | Opower (Allcott, 2011) | Would we expect the differences<br>to increase the effectiveness shown<br>in our report? |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Common Elements                                                                                 |            |                        |                                                                                          |
| Social (neighborhood) comparison                                                                | ×          | ×                      | ·                                                                                        |
| Electricity consumption feedback                                                                | ×          | ×                      | ·                                                                                        |
| Electricity saving tips                                                                         | ×          | ×                      | ·                                                                                        |
| Diverging Elements                                                                              |            |                        |                                                                                          |
| Possibility of getting updated social comparisons<br>and more energy saving tips via an app     | ×          |                        | + (can trigger continuous<br>engagement with the information<br>from the letters)        |
| Price discounts for energy efficient products in<br>the online shop of the electricity provider | ×          |                        | + (Davis et al., 2014)                                                                   |
| Frequency of letters                                                                            | quarterly  | monthly - quarterly    | - (Allcott, 2011)                                                                        |
| Update of information (comparison electricity<br>consumption feedback)                          | yearly     | monthly - quarterly    | - (Gilbert and Zivin, 2014)                                                              |
| Calculation of typical household sizes associated<br>with electricity consumption               | ×          |                        | + (additional intuitive comparison)                                                      |
| Testimonials (electricity saving actions that<br>other households have implemented)             | ×          |                        | +                                                                                        |
| Communication of a 10% electricity saving goal<br>within one year                               | ×          |                        | + (Harding and Hsiaw, 2014)                                                              |
| Visualization of monthly electricity uses and<br>comparison to last year's consumption          |            | ×                      | –                                                                                        |

#### <span id="page-9-1"></span>**Table A2**

Comparison of ZIP code characteristics between the study population and German averages.

|                                          | Estimation Sample | Germany |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------|---------|
| Population Density, in Persons per km²   | 1879              | 224     |
| Household Size, in Persons per Household | 1.87              | 1.97    |
| Percentage of Retirees                   | 23.5%             | 20.5%   |
| Unemployment Rate                        | 6.8%              | 6.6%    |
| Purchasing Power per Person, in 1000 EUR | 22.0              | 21.3    |
| Percentage of Foreign Household Heads    | 7.0%              | 7.5%    |

Source: [microm \(2015\).](#page-14-32)

Image /page/10/Figure/1 description: This bar chart compares energy consumption in Germany and the US in 2011. The y-axis represents energy consumption in unspecified units, ranging from 0 to 3,000. The x-axis lists various categories of energy use: Space Cooling, Water Heating, Space Heating, Lighting, TV/Audio and Office, Refrigeration and Freezing, Washing Mach. Dryer and Dishwasher, Cooking, and Other. For Space Cooling, Germany's consumption is 4 units, while the US is 2,429. For Water Heating, Germany consumes 491 units, and the US consumes 1,175. Space Heating shows Germany at 295 units and the US at 705. Lighting consumption is 269 units in Germany and 1,645 in the US. TV/Audio and Office consumption is 846 units in Germany and 1,254 in the US. Refrigeration and Freezing consumes 554 units in Germany and 1,201 in the US. Washing Mach, Dryer and Dishwasher shows 411 units in Germany and 862 in the US. Cooking consumes 325 units in Germany and 287 in the US. Lastly, the 'Other' category shows Germany consuming 122 units, while the US consumes 3,134.

Notes: US data is based on the most recent domestic electricity consumption data from 2011, as docu-
mented in EIA (2013). For Germany, we construct the same consumption categories for the year 2011
using data documented in BDEW (2016), UBA (2011) and Destatis (2015). The category “other” com-
prises furnace fans, boiler circulation pumps, small electric devices, heating elements, and motors, for
example (but not electric vehicles).

**Fig. A1** Composition of Electricity Consumption in Germany and the US [\(EIA, 2013;](#page-14-33) [BDEW, 2016;](#page-13-26) [UBA, 2011;](#page-14-34) [Destatis, 2015\)](#page-13-27).

#### **Table A3**

| Average treatment effect (ATE) on households' electricity consumption. |  |  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|--|
|                                                                        |  |  |

|                        | (1)            | (2)             | (3)             | (4)             |
|------------------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| ATE                    | -0.719*        | -0.620**        | -0.684**        | -0.627**        |
| Standard Error         | (0.383)        | (0.270)         | (0.269)         | (0.268)         |
| 95% Conf. Interval     | [-1.469,0.032] | [-1.150,-0.090] | [-1.212,-0.156] | [-1.152,-0.101] |
| Outliers Removed       | -              | ✓               | ✓               | ✓               |
| Time Controls          | -              | -               | ✓               | ✓               |
| Stratification Dummies | -              | -               | -               | ✓               |
| R2                     | 0.0003         | 0.0005          | 0.025           |                 |
| Number of Obs.         | 11,620         | 11,388          | 11,388          |                 |

*Notes:* The outcome variable is the change in a household's annual electricity consumption between the treatment and baseline period, divided by the average control group consumption in the post period (both in kilowatt-hours), and multiplied by 100 to ease the readability as the percentage changes. ∗∗,∗ denote statistical significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.

#### **Table A4** Attrition.

|                      | Treatment Group | Control Group | Difference<br>(Std. Error; p-Value) |
|----------------------|-----------------|---------------|-------------------------------------|
| Movers, in %         | 1.61            | 1.29          | 0.31<br>(0.22, 0.148)               |
| Number of Households | 5888            | 5904          |                                     |

*Notes:* We identify movers as households that we can observe in the baseline period, but not in the endline period.

#### **Table A5**

Abatement cost under the scenario of a persistent treatment effect.

| Country        | No Persistence<br>Abatement Cost in \$/t CO₂ | 15 Perc. Points Reduction in Effect Size per Year<br>Abatement Cost in \$/t CO₂ |
|----------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Canada         | 67–162                                       | 17–42                                                                           |
| United States  | 20–49                                        | 5–12                                                                            |
| France         | 323–779                                      | 84–202                                                                          |
| Germany        | 75–182                                       | 20–47                                                                           |
| Italy          | 139–335                                      | 36–87                                                                           |
| Poland         | 81–196                                       | 21–51                                                                           |
| Spain          | 121–293                                      | 32–76                                                                           |
| Sweden         | 1162–2799                                    | 302–727                                                                         |
| United Kingdom | 64–153                                       | 17–40                                                                           |
| Japan          | 39–94                                        | 10–24                                                                           |
| South Korea    | 65–156                                       | 17–41                                                                           |
| Australia      | 22–53                                        | 6–14                                                                            |

*Notes:* Following [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\),](#page-13-2) the calculations in the table assume linear attenuation rates of 15%. The cost-effectiveness calculations extrapolate electricity reductions until linear decay rates lead to zero reductions. Assumptions about annual electricity uses, carbon intensities of electricity generation and the range of effect sizes are as in [Table 1.](#page-2-3)

<span id="page-12-1"></span>**Table A6** International comparison of welfare effects of HER interventions.

| Country        | (1)<br>Average<br>Electricity<br>Consumption<br>in kWh | (2)<br>Retail Price<br>in \$/kWh | (3)<br>Spot Price<br>in \$ | (4)<br>Levelized Cost<br>of Marginal<br>Plant<br>in \$/kWh | (5)<br>CO2 Emissions<br>in g per kWh<br>from Electricity<br>Generation | (6)<br>Welfare Change,<br>Considering only<br>Environmental<br>Externalities (as<br>in the Main<br>Text), in \$ | (7)<br>Welfare Change<br>using Spot<br>Price, in \$ | (8)<br>Welfare Change<br>using Levelized<br>Cost, in \$ |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Canada         | 11,379                                                 | 0.107                            | 0.022                      | 0.071                                                      | 158                                                                    | −3.1 to −1.7                                                                                                    | −11.9 to −7.3                                       | 0.3–6.4                                                 |
| United States  | 12,293                                                 | 0.127                            | 0.035                      | 0.071                                                      | 489                                                                    | −0.9 to 3.5                                                                                                     | −5.9 to −4.8                                        | 1.2–8.5                                                 |
| France         | 5859                                                   | 0.186                            | 0.043                      | 0.101                                                      | 64                                                                     | −3.8 to −3.5                                                                                                    | −11.8 to −7.2                                       | −2.5 to −0.5                                            |
| Germany        | 3304                                                   | 0.327                            | 0.035                      | 0.106                                                      | 486                                                                    | −3.2 to −2.0                                                                                                    | −14.6 to −8.4                                       | −6.8 to −5.2                                            |
| Italy          | 2542                                                   | 0.269                            | 0.058                      | 0.099                                                      | 343                                                                    | −3.5 to −2.9                                                                                                    | −8.5 to −5.9                                        | −5.0 to −4.4                                            |
| Poland         | 1935                                                   | 0.157                            | 0.040                      | 0.083                                                      | 769                                                                    | −3.2 to −2.1                                                                                                    | −4.2 to −4.1                                        | −2.9 to −1.4                                            |
| Spain          | 4040                                                   | 0.263                            | 0.056                      | 0.083                                                      | 247                                                                    | −3.5 to −2.7                                                                                                    | −11.4 to −7.1                                       | −7.8 to −5.6                                            |
| Sweden         | 8025                                                   | 0.208                            | 0.024                      | 0.114                                                      | 13                                                                     | −3.9 to −3.9                                                                                                    | −22.8 to −11.8                                      | −1.9 to 0.9                                             |
| United Kingdom | 4145                                                   | 0.242                            | 0.062                      | 0.108                                                      | 459                                                                    | −3.0 to −1.6                                                                                                    | −8.4 to −5.8                                        | −3.2 to −2.1                                            |
| Japan          | 5434                                                   | 0.225                            | 0.081                      | 0.143                                                      | 572                                                                    | −2.4 to −0.1                                                                                                    | −4.2 to −4.1                                        | 0.6–7.0                                                 |
| South Korea    | 3489                                                   | 0.103                            | 0.090                      | 0.130                                                      | 536                                                                    | −3.0 to −1.7                                                                                                    | −1.0 to 3.3                                         | 0.9–7.9                                                 |
| Australia      | 6959                                                   | 0.216                            | 0.082                      | 0.108                                                      | 798                                                                    | −1.1 to 3.0                                                                                                     | −2.7 to −0.9                                        | −0.3 to 5.0                                             |

*Notes:* Our calculations assume printing and mailing cost of one dollar per report, four reports per year and average electricity reductions of 1.37–3.30%. Average electricity consumption and CO2 [intensities of electricity generation correspond to 2013, the most recently available year documented in](#page-15-0) WEC (2016) and [IEA \(2015\),](#page-14-14) respectively.

Retail electricity prices for 2015 are drawn from [Eurostat \(2016\)](#page-14-35) for EU-countries and from [IEA \(2016\)](#page-14-15) for the remaining countries. Spot prices for electricity are annual spot price averages from the following sources: USA (unweighted mean of 8 price hubs from [EIA \(2017\)\)](#page-14-36); France, Germany and [UK \(](#page-14-41)[EPEX, 2016](#page-14-37)[\); Italy \(](#page-14-41)[GME, 2017](#page-14-38)[\); Poland \(](#page-14-41)[PSE, 2017](#page-14-39)[\); Spain \(](#page-14-41)[OMIE, 2016](#page-14-40)[\); Sweden and Norway \(unweighted mean of regional prices from](#page-14-41) Nord Pool (2017)); Japan [\(JEPX, 2017\)](#page-14-42); South Korea [\(KPX, 2017\)](#page-14-43); Australia (unweighted mean of regional prices from [AEMC \(2016\)\)](#page-13-28); Canada (unweighted mean of the Hourly Ontario Energy Price (Class B for residential Consumers) [IESO \(2015\),](#page-14-44) and the Alberta Average Pool Price, [AESO \(2016\)\)](#page-13-29).

The levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is taken from [OECD \(2015\).](#page-14-45) We assume combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) as the marginal power plant in the respective country, as for example in [Allcott and Rogers \(2014\)](#page-13-2) and [Allcott and Mullainathan \(2010\).](#page-13-3) Note that CCGT tends to have a larger production cost for electricity so that we tend to overestimate the welfare impacts of HER. Furthermore, we take the largest available production cost estimates, assuming a discount rate of 10%, which further increases welfare. Only in Poland, where natural gas power plants are virtually absent and coal power plants are predominant, we employ levelized cost of a hard coal plant (as we lack LCOE data for Poland, we approximate it by the LCOE of a hard coal power plant in Germany [OECD \(2015\),](#page-14-45) where fuel costs for hard coal are very similar). In cases where estimates for 2015 are available, we use the latest available estimate from [OECD \(2015\):](#page-14-45) Sweden (value from 2010), Spain (value from 1998) and Italy (value from 2010). As LCOE are unavailable for Australia in [OECD \(2015\),](#page-14-45) we take the upper bound of the range provided in [WEC \(2013\),](#page-15-3) and approximate the LCOE in Canada by the LCOE in the US, which has been very similar in the past [\(OECD, 2015\)](#page-14-45). Where applicable, we use average exchange rates for 2015, as provided by [FED \(2016\).](#page-14-46) The 2015 average annual exchange rate for Poland (PLN) is provided by [NBP \(2017\).](#page-14-47)

#### <span id="page-12-0"></span>**B. Welfare calculations**

We follow [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\)](#page-13-10) and calculate the welfare implications of home energy reports by the following expression:

$$
\Delta W = \Delta V - C_n + (\pi_e - \varphi_e) \Delta \widetilde{e},
$$

where:

- Δ*W*: welfare change per participant induced by the intervention.
- Δ*V*: private welfare gain from receiving HER. We approximate it by the WTP measure from [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\)](#page-13-10) that reflects all costs and benefits as perceived by the recipient households. More specifically, households value HER by 54% of the realized electricity cost savings, so that the consumer welfare gain of HER is Δ*V* = Δ*̃e* · 0.54 · *pe*.
- *Cn*: annual cost of the HER per participant. We assume the cost per quarterly letter to be 1 US\$ per letter, so that the annual cost is *Cn* = 4\$.
- *<sup>e</sup>* = *pe* − *cc*: mark-up of electricity retail prices *pe* over production cost *cc*.
- *pe*: electricity retail prices that are taken from [Eurostat \(2016\)](#page-14-35) and the [IEA \(2016\).](#page-14-15)
- *cc*: electricity generation cost. Because electricity generation cost depends on the time-of-use of electricity and the time horizon of the analysis, finding a precise measure of generation cost *cc* in electricity markets is inherently difficult. We do not want to take a stance on the question of whether levelized generation cost or spot prices are the more suitable electricity generation cost measure and thus present results for both approaches to approximate *cc*. First, following Allcott and Kessler (2019) [we use levelized generation cost and, second, annual spot price averages. A complete description of all data sources](#page-13-10) for spot prices and levelized cost is given in the notes to [Table A6.](#page-12-1)
- *<sup>e</sup>* captures the environmental externalities from electricity generation. We approximate *<sup>e</sup>* by the social cost of carbon,

estimated at around 38 US\$ per ton in 2015 [\(IAWG, 2013\)](#page-14-18).

• Δ*̃e* denotes the average treatment effects of HER on electricity consumption (in kWh). To account for the different effect sizes in the *Opower* studies (e.g. [Allcott, 2011\)](#page-13-1) and in this paper, we use the range of 1.37–3.30%.

As a reference point, Column 6 of [Table A6](#page-12-1) displays the welfare estimate when we only account for direct cost and climate benefits of HER. This is the welfare analysis that is commonly implemented in classical program evaluations of climate policy interventions and corresponds to our analysis in Section [2.](#page-1-1) The results show that – under these assumptions – welfare effects of HER are negative in all countries except for the US and Australia, where abatement cost of HER are lower than 38 US\$ per ton [\(Table 1\)](#page-2-3).

Columns 7 and 8 show results for the expanded scope of the welfare analysis as suggested by [Allcott and Kessler \(2019\)](#page-13-10) for spot prices and levelized cost, respectively. This shows that in a majority of countries HER are not welfare improving, even under optimistic assumptions on effect sizes. Only in South Korea can HER achieve positive welfare changes, albeit only when the effectiveness of HER comes close to the upper bound of 3.3%. Using levelized cost in Column 8, the welfare implications of HER improve. Positive welfare effects are possible in Australia, Canada, the US, Japan, and South Korea. In all European countries, welfare effects are still negative, except for Sweden.

#### <span id="page-13-20"></span>**Appendix C. Supplementary data**

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at [https://www.rwi-essen.de/media/content/pages/publikationen/](https://www.rwi-essen.de/media/content/pages/publikationen/ruhr-economic-papers/rep_714_online_appendix.pdf) [ruhr-economic-papers/rep\\_714\\_online\\_appendix.pdf](https://www.rwi-essen.de/media/content/pages/publikationen/ruhr-economic-papers/rep_714_online_appendix.pdf) and [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102351.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102351)

#### **References**

- <span id="page-13-28"></span><span id="page-13-16"></span>[Abrahamse, W., Steg, L., 2013. Social influence approaches to encourage resource conservation: a meta-analysis. Global Environ. Change 23, 1773–1785.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref1) AEMC, 2016. Residential Electricity Price Trends, Final Report. Australian Energy Market Commission. [http://www.aemc.gov.au/getattachment/be91ba47-45df-](http://www.aemc.gov.au/getattachment/be91ba47-45df-48ee-9dde-e67d68d2e4d4/2016-Electricity-Price-Trends-Report.aspx)
- [48ee-9dde-e67d68d2e4d4/2016-Electricity-Price-Trends-Report.aspx.](http://www.aemc.gov.au/getattachment/be91ba47-45df-48ee-9dde-e67d68d2e4d4/2016-Electricity-Price-Trends-Report.aspx) (Accessed 23 February 2017). AESO, 2016. AESO 2015 Annual Market Statistics. Alberta Electric System Operator. [https://www.aeso.ca/assets/listedfiles/2015-Annual-Market-Stats-WEB.pdf.](https://www.aeso.ca/assets/listedfiles/2015-Annual-Market-Stats-WEB.pdf)
- <span id="page-13-29"></span><span id="page-13-5"></span>(Accessed 24 February 2017). [Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A., LoRe, D., Suskind, D., 2017a. Scaling for economists: lessons from the non-adherence problem in the medical literature.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref4) J. Econ. Perspect.
- 31, 125–144. [Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A., Suskind, D.L., 2017b. What can we learn from experiments? Understanding the threats to the scalability of experimental results. Am.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref5)
- <span id="page-13-6"></span>Econ. Rev. 107, 282–286.
- <span id="page-13-1"></span>[Allcott, H., 2011. Social norms and energy conservation. J. Publ. Econ. 95, 1082–1095.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref6)
- [Allcott, H., 2015. Site selection bias in program evaluation. Q. J. Econ. 130, 1117–1165.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref7)
- <span id="page-13-23"></span><span id="page-13-4"></span>[Allcott, H., 2016. Paternalism and energy efficiency: an overview. Ann. Rev. Econ. 8, 145–176.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref8)
- [Allcott, H., Kessler, J.B., 2019. The welfare effects of nudges: a case study of energy use social comparisons. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 11, 236–276.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref9)
- <span id="page-13-10"></span><span id="page-13-3"></span><span id="page-13-2"></span>[Allcott, H., Mullainathan, S., 2010. Behavior and energy policy. Science 327, 1204–1205.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref10)
- [Allcott, H., Rogers, T., 2014. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral interventions: experimental evidence from energy conservation. Am. Econ. Rev.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref11) 104, 3003–3037.
- <span id="page-13-17"></span>[Andor, M.A., Fels, K.M., 2018. Behavioral economics and energy conservation–A systematic review of non-price interventions and their causal effects. Ecol. Econ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref12) 148, 178–210.
- <span id="page-13-11"></span>[Ayres, I., Raseman, S., Shih, A., 2013. Evidence from two large field experiments that peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage. J. Law Econ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref13) Organ. 29, 992–1022.
- <span id="page-13-26"></span><span id="page-13-22"></span>BDEW, 2016. Energie-Info: Stromverbrauch im Haushalt. Bundesverband der Energie- und Wasserwirtschaft. https://www.bdew.de/internet.nsf/id/0D6D0C [20786B2929C1257FE90030A849/\\$file/BDEW\\_Stromverbrauch%20im%20Haushalt\\_Stand\\_Juli%202016.pdf. \(Accessed 23 February 2017\).](https://www.bdew.de/internet.nsf/id/0D6D0C20786B2929C1257FE90030A849/$file/BDEW_Stromverbrauch%20im%20Haushalt_Stand_Juli%202016.pdf)
- [Bernedo, M., Ferraro, P.J., Price, M., 2014. The persistent impacts of norm-based messaging and their implications for water conservation. J. Consum. Pol. 37,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref15) 437–452.
- <span id="page-13-12"></span>[Brandon, A., Ferraro, P.J., List, J.A., Metcalfe, R.D., Price, M.K., Rundhammer, F., 2017. Do the Effects of Social Nudges Persist? Theory and Evidence from 38 Natural](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref16) Field Experiments. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Working Paper No. 23277 (March).
- <span id="page-13-0"></span>[Brent, D.A., Cook, J.H., Olsen, S., 2015. Social comparisons, household water use, and participation in utility conservation programs: evidence from three ran](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref17)domized trials. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ. 2, 597–627.
- <span id="page-13-18"></span>[Buckley, P., 2020. Prices, information and nudges for residential electricity conservation: a meta-analysis. Ecol. Econ. 172, 106635.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref18)
- <span id="page-13-14"></span><span id="page-13-13"></span>[Byrne, D.P., Nauze, A.L., Martin, L.A., 2018. Tell me something I don't already know: informedness and the impact of information programs. Rev. Econ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref19) Stat. 100, 510–527.
- <span id="page-13-7"></span>[Christensen, G., Miguel, E., 2018. Transparency, reproducibility, and the credibility of economics research. J. Econ. Lit. 56, 920–980.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref20)
- [Costa, D.L., Kahn, M.E., 2013. Energy conservation "nudges" and environmentalist ideology: evidence from a randomized residential electricity field experiment.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref21) J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 11, 680–702.
- <span id="page-13-15"></span>Czajkowski, M., Zagórska, K., Hanley, N., 2019. Social norm nudging and preferences for household recycling. Resour. Energy Econ. 58, 101110, [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.07.004) [10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.07.004.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.07.004)
- [Davis, J., Guryan, J., Hallberg, K., Ludwig, J., 2017. The Economics of Scale-Up. National Bureau of Economic Research \(NBER\). Working Paper No. 23925 \(October\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref23)
- <span id="page-13-25"></span><span id="page-13-24"></span><span id="page-13-21"></span>[Davis, L.W., Fuchs, A., Gertler, P., 2014. Cash for coolers: evaluating a large-scale Appliance replacement program in Mexico. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Pol. 6, 207–238.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref24) Deaton, A., Cartwright, N., 2018. Understanding and misunderstanding randomized controlled trials. Soc. Sci. Med. 210, 2–21, [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.12.005)

[socscimed.2017.12.005.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.12.005) [Dehejia, R., Pop-Eleches, C., Samii, C., 2019. From local to global: external validity in a fertility natural experiment. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 1–27.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref26)

- <span id="page-13-8"></span>[DellaVigna, S., Linos, E., 2020. RCTs to Scale: Comprehensive Evidence from Two Nudge Units. Technical Report. Working Paper, UC Berkeley.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref27)
- <span id="page-13-27"></span><span id="page-13-9"></span>Destatis, 2015. Umweltnutzung und Wirtschaft. Tabellen zu den Umweltökonomischen Gesamtrechnungen. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/The [matisch/UmweltoekonomischeGesamtrechnungen/Querschnitt/UmweltnutzungundWirtschaftTabelle5850007157006Teil\\_2.pdf?\\_\\_blob](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/UmweltoekonomischeGesamtrechnungen/Querschnitt/UmweltnutzungundWirtschaftTabelle5850007157006Teil_2.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)=publicationFile. (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- <span id="page-13-19"></span>[Dietz, T., Gardner, G.T., Gilligan, J., Stern, P.C., Vandenbergh, M.P., 2009. Household actions can provide a behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce US carbon emissions.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref29) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 18452–18456.

- <span id="page-14-33"></span>EIA, 2013. Annual Energy Outlook 2013. U.S. Energy Information Administration, [http://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/0383\(2013\).pdf.](http://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/0383(2013).pdf) (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- <span id="page-14-36"></span>EIA, 2017. Wholesale Electricity and Natural Gas Market Data. U.S. Energy Information Administration, [https://www.eia.gov/electricity/wholesale/history.](https://www.eia.gov/electricity/wholesale/history) (Accessed 2 March 2017).
- <span id="page-14-37"></span><span id="page-14-35"></span>EPEX, 2016. EPEX SPOT Reaches in 2015 the Highest Spot Power Exchange Volume Ever. European Power Exchange - Press Release, [https://www.epexspot.com/document/34250/2016-01-08\\_EPEX%20SPOT\\_2015\\_Annual%20Press%20Release.pdf.](https://www.epexspot.com/document/34250/2016-01-08_EPEX%20SPOT_2015_Annual%20Press%20Release.pdf) (Accessed 2 March 2017).
- <span id="page-14-46"></span>Eurostat, 2016. Electricity Price Statistics. [http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Electricity\\_price\\_statistics.](http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Electricity_price_statistics) (Accessed 23 February 2017). FED, 2016. Foreign Exchange Rates - G.5A. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Release Date: January 4, 2016. [https://www.federalreserve.gov/](https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g5a/20160104/) [releases/g5a/20160104/.](https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g5a/20160104/) (Accessed 24 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-10"></span><span id="page-14-0"></span>[Ferraro, P.J., Miranda, J.J., 2013. Heterogeneous treatment effects and mechanisms in information-based environmental policies: evidence from a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref35) large-scale field experiment. Resour. Energy Econ. 35, 356–379.
- [Ferraro, P.J., Miranda, J.J., Price, M.K., 2011. The persistence of treatment effects with norm-based policy instruments: evidence from a randomized environmental](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref36) policy experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 318–322.
- <span id="page-14-7"></span><span id="page-14-3"></span><span id="page-14-1"></span>[Ferraro, P.J., Price, M.K., 2013. Using non-pecuniary strategies to influence behavior: evidence from a large scale field experiment. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95, 64–73.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref37)
- Frey, B.S., Meier, S., 2004. Social comparisons and pro-social behavior: [testing "conditional cooperation" in a field experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 94,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref38) 1717–1722. Gechter, M., 2015. Generalizing the Results from Social Experiments: Theory and Evidence from mexico and india. [http://www.personal.psu.edu/mdg5396/](http://www.personal.psu.edu/mdg5396/Gechter_Generalizing_Social_Experiments.pdf) [Gechter\\_Generalizing\\_Social\\_Experiments.pdf.](http://www.personal.psu.edu/mdg5396/Gechter_Generalizing_Social_Experiments.pdf) (Accessed 6 June 2017).
- [Gilbert, B., Zivin, J.S.G., 2014. Dynamic salience with intermittent billing: evidence from smart electricity meters. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107, 176–190.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref40)
- <span id="page-14-38"></span><span id="page-14-23"></span>GME, 2017. Summary Data - MPE-MGP – Overview . Gestore del Mercato Elettrico. [http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/Statistiche/ME/DatiSintesi.aspx.](http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/Statistiche/ME/DatiSintesi.aspx) (Accessed 2 March 2017).
- <span id="page-14-19"></span>[Goulder, L.H., 2013. Markets for pollution allowances: what are the \(new\) lessons? J. Econ. Perspect. 27, 87–102.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref42)
- <span id="page-14-16"></span>[Greenstone, M., Kopits, E., Wolverton, A., 2013. Developing a social cost of carbon for US regulatory analysis: a methodology and interpretation. Rev. Environ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref43) Econ. Pol. 7, 23–46.
- <span id="page-14-24"></span>[Harding, M., Hsiaw, A., 2014. Goal setting and energy conservation. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107, 209–227.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref44)
- <span id="page-14-31"></span>Henry, M.L., Ferraro, P.J., Kontoleon, A., 2019. The behavioural effect of [electronic home energy reports: evidence from a randomised field trial in the United](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref45) States. Energy Pol. 132, 1256–1261.
- <span id="page-14-25"></span>[Holland, S.P., Mansur, E.T., Muller, N.Z., Yates, A.J., 2016. Are there environmental benefits from driving electric vehicles? The importance of local factors. Am.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref46) Econ. Rev. 106, 3700–3729.
- <span id="page-14-26"></span>Holland, S.P., Mansur, E.T., Muller, N.Z., Yates, A.J., 2019. Distributional effects of air pollution from electric vehicle adoption. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ., [https://doi.org/10.1086/701188.](https://doi.org/10.1086/701188)
- <span id="page-14-27"></span>[Hotz, J.V., Imbens, G.W., Mortimer, J.H., 2005. Predicting the efficacy of future training programs using past experiences at other locations. J. Econom. 125,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref48) 241–270.
- <span id="page-14-18"></span>IAWG, 2013. Technical Support Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis. U.S. Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis. [https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social\\_cost\\_of\\_carbon\\_for\\_ria\\_2013\\_](https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social_cost_of_carbon_for_ria_2013_update.pdf) [update.pdf.](https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social_cost_of_carbon_for_ria_2013_update.pdf) (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- <span id="page-14-14"></span>IEA, 2015. CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion - Highlights. International Energy Agency, [https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/](https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/CO2EmissionsFromFuelCombustionHighlights2015.pdf) [CO2EmissionsFromFuelCombustionHighlights2015.pdf.](https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/CO2EmissionsFromFuelCombustionHighlights2015.pdf) (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- <span id="page-14-15"></span>IEA, 2016. Energy Prices and Taxes - Fourth Quarter 2016. International Energy Agency, [http://www.oecd.org/publications/energy-prices-and-taxes-16096835.](http://www.oecd.org/publications/energy-prices-and-taxes-16096835.htm) [htm.](http://www.oecd.org/publications/energy-prices-and-taxes-16096835.htm) (Accessed 23 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-44"></span>IESO, 2015. Ontario Energy Report Q4 2015. Independent Electricity System Operator, [https://www.ontarioenergyreport.ca/pdfs/5806\\_IESO\\_](https://www.ontarioenergyreport.ca/pdfs/5806_IESO_OntarioEnergyReportQ42016_Electricity_EN_FA.pdf) [OntarioEnergyReportQ42016\\_Electricity\\_EN\\_FA.pdf.](https://www.ontarioenergyreport.ca/pdfs/5806_IESO_OntarioEnergyReportQ42016_Electricity_EN_FA.pdf) (Accessed 23 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-2"></span>[Jaime, M.M., Carlsson, F., 2018. Direct and spillover effects of a social information campaign on residential water-savings. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 92, 222–243.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref53) JEPX, 2017. Spot Market Indices - Fiscal Year 2015. Japan Electric Power Exchange, [http://www.jepx.org/market/excel/index\\_2015.csv.](http://www.jepx.org/market/excel/index_2015.csv) (Accessed 24 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-43"></span><span id="page-14-42"></span>KPX, 2017. System Marginal Price 2015. Korea Power Exchange, [http://epsis.kpx.or.kr/epsis/ekmaStaticMain.do?cmd](http://epsis.kpx.or.kr/epsis/ekmaStaticMain.do?cmd004013flaglocaleEN)=004013&flag=&locale=EN. (Accessed 5 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-28"></span>[Leviton, L.C., 2017. Generalizing about public health interventions: a mixed-methods approach to external validity. Annu. Rev. Publ. Health 38, 371–391.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref56)
- <span id="page-14-6"></span>[Levitt, S.D., List, J.A., 2007. What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref57) real world? J. Econ. Perspect. 21, 153–174.
- <span id="page-14-22"></span>[Levitt, S.D., List, J.A., 2009. Field experiments in economics: the past, the present, and the future. Eur. Econ. Rev. 53, 1–18.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref58)
- <span id="page-14-32"></span>[microm, 2015. Socioeconomic Regional Data. Version: 1. RWI – Rheinisch–Westfälisches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung e.V.. DOI:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref59) 10.7807/microm:einwGeAl:V3, 10.7807/microm:alq:V3, 10.7807/microm:kaufkraft:V3.
- <span id="page-14-29"></span><span id="page-14-11"></span>[Muller, S.M., 2015. Causal interaction and external validity: obstacles to the policy relevance of randomized evaluations. World Bank Econ. Rev. 29, S217–S225.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref60) Myers, E., Souza, M., 2020. Social comparison nudges without monetary incentives: evidence from home energy reports. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 101, 102315, [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102315.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102315)
- <span id="page-14-47"></span>NBP, 2017. Statistics - Exchange Rates. Narodowy Bank Polski. [http://www.nbp.pl/homen.aspx?f](http://www.nbp.pl/homen.aspx?f=/kursy/kursyen.htm)=/kursy/kursyen.htm. (Accessed 3 March 2017).
- Nord Pool, 2017. Elspot Prices. Nord Pool, [http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/Elspot/Area-Prices/.](http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/Elspot/Area-Prices/) (Accessed 2 March 2017).
- <span id="page-14-41"></span><span id="page-14-17"></span>[Nordhaus, W., 2014. Estimates of the social cost of carbon: concepts and results from the DICE-2013R model and alternative approaches. J. Assoc. Environ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref64) Resour. Econ. 1, 273–312.
- Nyborg, K., 2018. Social norms and the environment. Ann. Rev. Resour. Econ. 10, 405–423, [https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100517-023232.](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100517-023232)
- <span id="page-14-45"></span><span id="page-14-5"></span>OECD, 2015. Projected Costs of Generating Electricity - 2015 Edition. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, [https://www.iea.org/](https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/projected-costs-of-generating-electricity-2015-edition.html) [publications/freepublications/publication/projected-costs-of-generating-electricity-2015-edition.html.](https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/projected-costs-of-generating-electricity-2015-edition.html) (Accessed 23 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-40"></span><span id="page-14-12"></span>OMIE, 2016. Price Report. Operador do Mercado Ibérico de Energia. [http://www.omie.es/files/informe\\_precios\\_ing\\_navegable.pdf.](http://www.omie.es/files/informe_precios_ing_navegable.pdf) (Accessed 2 March 2017).
- [Pellerano, J.A., Price, M.K., Puller, S.L., Sánchez, G.E., 2017. Do extrinsic incentives undermine social norms? evidence from a field experiment in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref68) energy conservation. Environ. Resour. Econ. 67, 413–428.
- <span id="page-14-20"></span>[Perino, G., 2015. Climate campaigns, cap and trade, and carbon leakage: why trying to reduce your carbon footprint can harm the climate. J. Assoc. Environ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref69) Resour. Econ. 2, 469–495.
- <span id="page-14-8"></span>[Peters, J., Langbein, J., Roberts, G., 2018. Generalization in the tropics–development policy, randomized controlled trials, and external validity. World Bank Res.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref70) Obs. 33, 34–64.
- <span id="page-14-30"></span>Pritchett, L., Sandefur, J., et al., 2015. Learning from [experiments when context matters. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 471–475.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref71)
- <span id="page-14-39"></span>PSE, 2017. Electricity Prices and Volumes on the Balancing Market. Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne, [http://www.pse.pl/index.php?dzid](http://www.pse.pl/index.php?dzid=129didlang_id=2)=129&did=&lang\_id=2. (Accessed 24 February 2017).
- <span id="page-14-4"></span>[Shang, J., Croson, R., 2009. A field experiment in charitable contribution: the impact of social information on the voluntary provision of public goods. Econ. J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref73) 119, 1422–1439.
- <span id="page-14-13"></span>[Sudarshan, A., 2017. Nudges in the marketplace: the response of household electricity consumption to information and monetary incentives. J. Econ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref74) Behav. Organ. 134, 320–335.
- <span id="page-14-34"></span>UBA, 2011. Klimaschutz durch Reduzierung des Energiebedarfs für Gebäudekühlung. Umweltbundesamt, [https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/](https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/461/publikationen/3979.pdf) [medien/461/publikationen/3979.pdf.](https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/461/publikationen/3979.pdf) (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- UBA, 2018. Entwicklung der spezifischen Kohlendioxid-Emissionen [des deutschen Strommix in den Jahren 1990 2017. Climate Change 11.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref76) .
- <span id="page-14-21"></span><span id="page-14-9"></span>[Vivalt, E., 2015. Heterogeneous treatment effects in impact evaluation. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 467–470.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref77)

- <span id="page-15-3"></span><span id="page-15-0"></span>WEC, 2013. World Energy Perspective - Cost of Energy Technologies. World Energy Council, [https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/WEC\\_](https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/WEC_J1143_CostofTECHNOLOGIES_021013_WEB_Final.pdf) [J1143\\_CostofTECHNOLOGIES\\_021013\\_WEB\\_Final.pdf.](https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/WEC_J1143_CostofTECHNOLOGIES_021013_WEB_Final.pdf) (Accessed 23 February 2017).
- <span id="page-15-2"></span><span id="page-15-1"></span>WEC, 2016. Energy Efficiency Indicators via Enerdata, Average Electricity Consumption Per Electrified Household. World Energy Council, [https://www.wec](https://www.wec-indicators.enerdata.eu/secteur.php/household-electricity-use.html)[indicators.enerdata.eu/secteur.php/household-electricity-use.html.](https://www.wec-indicators.enerdata.eu/secteur.php/household-electricity-use.html) (Accessed 28 October 2016).
- [Wichman, C.J., 2017. Information provision and consumer behavior: a natural experiment in billing frequency. J. Publ. Econ. 152, 13–33.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref80)
- [Zivin, J.S.G., Kotchen, M.J., Mansur, E.T., 2014. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of marginal emissions: implications for electric cars and other electricity-shift](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0095-0696(20)30074-7/sref81)ing policies. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107, 248–268.